Added the draft for v1.8.0 release notes (#67)
harvester/release-notes: v1.8.0.md

# Harvester v1.8.0 Release Notes

> This release introduces several enhancements and bug fixes that improve system quality and the overall user experience. The documentation is available at https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7.

Reviewer: It should point to the link https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8 instead.

Reviewer: Fixed

:memo: https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/install/net-install/

#### ARM64

:cd: https://releases.rancher.com/harvester/v1.8.0/harvester-v1.8.0-arm64.iso

:file_folder: https://releases.rancher.com/harvester/v1.8.0/harvester-v1.8.0-vmlinuz-arm64

:file_folder: https://releases.rancher.com/harvester/v1.8.0/harvester-v1.8.0-initrd-arm64

:file_folder: https://releases.rancher.com/harvester/v1.8.0/harvester-v1.8.0-rootfs-arm64.squashfs

:white_check_mark: https://releases.rancher.com/harvester/v1.8.0/harvester-v1.8.0-arm64.sha512

:memo: https://releases.rancher.com/harvester/v1.8.0/version-arm64.yaml

## Installation

Harvester can be installed using the [ISO image](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/install/index), a [bootable USB drive](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/install/usb-install), and [PXE boot](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/install/pxe-boot-install/). A [net install ISO image](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/install/net-install), which contains only the core OS components, is also now available. For more information, see the [Installation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/install/requirements) section of the documentation.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Starting with v1.7.0, the installation process includes a mandatory step for configuring the login password for the default `rancher` user account.

Reviewer 2: Suggest removing this, as it has been emphasized in the 1.7 notes. For 1.8 users, they should already be aware of this through the install process.

## Upgrades

Harvester only allows upgrades from supported versions. For more information about upgrade paths and procedures, see [Upgrading Harvester](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/upgrade/index).

> > [!IMPORTANT]

Reviewer 3: we can drop this part since this one is the v1.8.0 release note.

Reviewer: Fixed.

> Harvester v1.7 transitions from wicked to NetworkManager for network management. If the management interface configuration was modified after installation, manual steps are required before upgrading to prevent errors. For more information, see [Migration from wicked to NetworkManager](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.7/upgrade/v1-6-x-to-v1-7-x#migration-from-wicked-to-networkmanager).

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we still need this for 1.8?

## Highlights

### Stand-alone Upgrade Manager

> 

Reviewer 2: This is not GA yet. Add `- Experimental` after the section title. Besides, users should be warned not to use this in production, but to evaluate the new upgrade process. 

Suggest moving experimental features to the bottom.

Reviewer 3: reordered

[Demo]() | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7867)

### Pod Security Admission (PSA) Support

Harvester v1.8.0 supports Pod Security Admission (PSA) to enforce Pod Security Standards (PSS). Built-in Kubernetes that validates and mutates the admission policies are used to enforce these standards on Harvester's system namespaces. This implementation guarantees that system-specific workloads remain unaffected and ensures a seamless upgrade path from non-PSA to PSA-enabled images. User namespaces remain unenforced, by default, preserving the flexibility for users to define their own security levels or independently deploy external policy engines (such as Kyverno, OPA Gatekeeper, or Kubewarden) without bloating the core upgrade path.

[Demo]() | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8196)

### [FEATURE] Support backup and restore through harvester-csi-driver in guest cluster

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove `[FEATURE]` and capitalize the first letter of each word, like `Support Backup and Restore in Guest Clusters`

Reviewer 3: update this part, cc @WebberHuang1118, could you also review this description?

[Demo]() | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9748)

### Fine-Grained Harvester RBAC Roles for Rancher

Harvester v1.8.0 introduces Harvester-specific Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) roles within Rancher, fully enforced at the backend API-level. This allows administrators to assign highly specific, granular permissions based on user needs. New capabilities include read-only roles for viewing VM definitions and monitoring data, specialized roles for non-admins to manage hardware devices (PCI, USB, vGPU), and scoped "VM Admin" roles restricted to editing VMs within specific namespaces without granting access to underlying infrastructure like images or networks. Role permissions are additive, and for security purposes, sensitive cluster-level configurations, such as logging facilities remain strictly editable only by cluster admins, with non-admins restricted to read-only access.

[Demo]() | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7909)

### Layer 3 Underlay for User-Defined Cluster Networks

> 

Reviewer 2: Do you mean `Software-Defined Cluster Network`?

[Demo]() | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7834)

### SUSE Observability Integration

Harvester v1.8.0 officially supports integration with the SUSE Observability Stack Pack. Harvester clusters can now seamlessly register with SUSE Observability to track core metrics, ensuring reliable data continuity and accurate resource reporting (such as CPU, memory, and node size) across cluster upgrades and dynamic scaling operations.

[Demo]() | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8282) 

## Bug Fixes

- [BUG] Cannot restore from snapshot replace existing [#10012](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10012)
- [backport v1.7] [BUG] Upgrading from v1.6.x to v1.7.0 stuck due to the incomplete kubeovn-operator upgrade [#9979](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9979)

> - [BUG] Addon managed DHCP is not working on Harvester 1.8.0-rc2 [#9976](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9976)

Reviewer 2: Why are there many 1.7 backport issues here? Their source issues for 1.8 should be included instead. 

1.7 backport issues should be added to the 1.7 release notes.

- [BUG] Enable/DisableCPUManager return 500 not 400 when Enable/DisableCPUManager on node already enable/disable [#9557](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9557)
- [REFACTOR] Extract common constants in go-common [#9369](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9369)
- [DOC] Update LB IPool document [#9354](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9354)
- [DOC] Add the explanation about k8s volumeattachment and Longhorn volumeattachment [#8833](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8833)
- [DOC] Hardening Guide [#8792](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8792)
- [FEATURE] SUSE Observability Stack Pack [#8282](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8282)
- [DOC] max vCPU per VM [#8118](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8118)
- [TASK] Update GH actions [#10279](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10279)
- [CI] add milestone along with e2e test issue creation [#9180](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9180)
- [TASK] Add Scarf integration for adoption metrics collection [#9147](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9147)

## Known Issues

> This section includes only issues identified before the release date. For information about all issues associated with v1.8.0, see [this page](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues?q=is:issue%20label:known-issue-v1.8.0).

Reviewer: This line wasn't generated from release toolkit but I think it's good to keep it.

- [ENHANCEMENT] Support Storage Migration for VMs Restored from Snapshot or Backup [#10343](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10343)
- [BUG] Failed to migrate VM after eject the windows image from CDROM device [#10221](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10221)
- [BUG] Fail to enable rancher-logging after negative upgrade cases [#10220](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10220)
- [BUG] node names not listed under node scheduling while creating a VM in Harvester UI [#10189](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10189)
- [BUG] Can not reset node scheduling of a VM to `run on all available nodes` [#9142](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9142)

## Component Versions

| Component | Version |
| --- | --- |
| CDI | [v1.62.0](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/releases/tag/v1.62.0) |

> | Kube-OVN | [v1.15.4](https://github.com/kubeovn/kube-ovn/releases/tag/v1.15.4) |

Reviewer: Since CDI and Kube-OVN are added manually in this table not from release toolkit, @Vicente-Cheng can you help me confirm their versions? Thanks!

Reviewer 3: That's correct, 
CDI is v1.62.0
Kube-ovn is v1.15.4

- [TASK] Add Scarf integration for adoption metrics collection [#9147](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9147)

## Known Issues

This section includes only issues identified before the release date. For information about all issues associated with v1.8.0, see [this page](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues?q=is:issue%20label:known-issue-v1.8.0).

- [ENHANCEMENT] Support Storage Migration for VMs Restored from Snapshot or Backup [#10343](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10343)
- [BUG] Failed to migrate VM after eject the windows image from CDROM device [#10221](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10221)
- [BUG] Fail to enable rancher-logging after negative upgrade cases [#10220](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10220)
- [BUG] node names not listed under node scheduling while creating a VM in Harvester UI [#10189](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10189)
- [BUG] Can not reset node scheduling of a VM to `run on all available nodes` [#9142](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9142)

## Deprecations and Removals

### Legacy BIOS Booting

> Support for legacy BIOS booting is removed in v1.8.0. Existing Harvester clusters that use this boot mode will continue to function, but upgrading to later versions may require re-installation in UEFI mode. To avoid issues and disruptions, use UEFI in new installations.

Reviewer: @tserong could you help me review this part "Removals of Legacy BIOS Booting"? Thanks!

Reviewer 4: LGTM!

[Demo](https://youtu.be/_zi3vC1T2ro) | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8196)

### Support backup and restore through harvester-csi-driver in guest cluster

Harvester v1.8.0 enables backup and restore operations for guest cluster workloads using the harvester-csi-driver. This allows users to protect their workload data by creating backups of Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) in the guest cluster, which are then stored in the underlying storage provider (now only support Longhorn) of the Harvester cluster. Users can easily restore these backups to recover from data loss or to migrate workloads between clusters, providing enhanced data protection for applications running within Harvester-managed guest clusters.
[Demo](https://youtu.be/GPecK2ONwcU) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/rancher/csi-driver#volume-backups) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/2661)

> 

Reviewer: https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/2661 is here

[Demo](https://youtu.be/cm7fCswrrz8) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/rancher/rancher-rbac) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7909)

### Layer 3 Underlay for User-Defined Cluster Networks

Harvester v1.8.0 introduces Layer 3 connectivity support for user-defined cluster networks to act as a dedicated underlay for Kube-OVN. Previously, inter-node VM traffic was forced over the management interface (mgmt-bo), causing potential bandwidth overhead and a lack of traffic segregation. With the latest udpate, users can now assign a specific IP range to a custom cluster network, which Harvester uses to automatically allocate IPs across nodes and provision dedicated OVS bridges. This enables complete segregation of VM data traffic from management traffic, significantly improving overall network performance, isolation, and architectural flexibility.

> [Demo](https://youtu.be/EHbVrJ-HgYI) | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7834)

Reviewer: https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7834 is here

[Demo](https://youtu.be/8UeAceSBy-Q) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/advanced/addons/suse-observability-agent) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8282)

### Stand-alone Upgrade Manager - Experimental

Harvester v1.8.0 decouples the upgrade logic from the core harvester binary into a stand-alone upgrade-manager. This architectural change enables faster delivery and testing of upgrade-related features and bug fixes without waiting for full release cycles. The upgrade lifecycle is now efficiently managed by `components—upgrade-shim` (early stage preparation), `upgrade-repo` (metadata and image hub), and `upgrade-manager` (custom lifecycle controllers) improving the overall maintainability and upgrade reliability.

[Demo](https://youtu.be/pxqGzArkxNc) | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7112)

### Enhanced Disk Identification Mechanism

> Harvester v1.8.0 introduces a reworked BlockDevice naming convention that removes the strict requirement for World Wide Names (WWNs). This allows disks without WWNs to be recognized and provisioned seamlessly across Longhorn V1, Longhorn V2, and LVM storage backends. This enhancement significantly streamlines disk attachment, particularly for NVMe devices and other hardware where WWNs may not be available.

Reviewer: @tserong @Vicente-Cheng can you help me review the description of this highlight feature? Thanks!

Reviewer 3: looks good to me, thanks for helping with that!

[Demo](https://youtu.be/3n_g1TYeeSQ) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/volume/storage-migration) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8285)

### Live CD-ROM Insertion & Ejection

Harvester v1.8.0 introduces dynamic management for CD-ROM volumes, allowing users to insert or eject ISO images while a VM is running. While adding or removing the CD-ROM device itself still typically necessitates a reboot, swapping the media within that device is now seamless. Additionally, VMs with mounted CD-ROMs are live migratable.

[Demo](https://youtu.be/jucSGtUyPVA) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/vm/cdrom-hotplug) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9261)

### Optimized Longhorn Resource Reservations

> Harvester v1.8.0 introduces reduced unnecessary CPU and memory consumption for clusters utilizing third-party storage solutions. Longhorn now detects when external storage is in use and dynamically lowers its resource reservations. This update also introduces configurable options for users to manually adjust these allocations, improving overall cluster efficiency and freeing up resources for other workloads without impacting core Longhorn functionalities.

Reviewer 2: cc @derekbit for reference.

> Harvester v1.8.0 introduces reduced unnecessary CPU and memory consumption for clusters utilizing third-party storage solutions. Longhorn now detects when external storage is in use and dynamically lowers its resource reservations. This update also introduces configurable options for users to manually adjust these allocations, improving overall cluster efficiency and freeing up resources for other workloads without impacting core Longhorn functionalities.

Reviewer 2: I assume this change? Since Harvester is the coordinator. 
```suggestion
Harvester v1.8.0 introduces reduced unnecessary CPU and memory consumption for clusters utilizing third-party storage solutions. Harvester now detects when external storage is in use and dynamically lowers Longhorn's resource reservations. This update also introduces configurable options for users to manually adjust these allocations, improving overall cluster efficiency and freeing up resources for other workloads without impacting core Longhorn functionalities.
```

[Demo](https://youtu.be/YdsF-UFiYyE) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/advanced/index#instance-manager-resources) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7867)

### Pod Security Admission (PSA) Support

Harvester v1.8.0 supports Pod Security Admission (PSA) to enforce Pod Security Standards (PSS). Built-in Kubernetes that validates and mutates the admission policies are used to enforce these standards on Harvester's system namespaces. This implementation guarantees that system-specific workloads remain unaffected and ensures a seamless upgrade path from non-PSA to PSA-enabled images. User namespaces remain unenforced, by default, preserving the flexibility for users to define their own security levels or independently deploy external policy engines (such as Kyverno, OPA Gatekeeper, or Kubewarden) without bloating the core upgrade path.

[Demo](https://youtu.be/_zi3vC1T2ro) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/advanced/cluster-pod-security-standard) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8196)

> ### Support backup and restore through harvester-csi-driver in guest cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### PVC Backup and Restore via harvester-csi-driver for Guest Cluster Workloads
```

[Demo](https://youtu.be/GPecK2ONwcU) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/rancher/csi-driver#volume-backups) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/2661)

### VM Pending Restart Notifications

Harvester v1.8.0 UI now proactively alerts users when a Virtual Machine requires a restart to fully apply configuration changes, such as interface binding updates or specific CPU/memory modifications. The dashboard continuously polls the VM's status conditions and displays a "Pending Restart" indicator when necessary. This prevents unapplied changes from silently blocking future live updates or resource hotplug operations, ensuring users can promptly resolve the state using the standard UI restart action.

> [Demo](https://youtu.be/pg23e9eQh5M) | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8411)

Reviewer: Documentation: wait for https://github.com/harvester/docs/pull/1030

### Configurable VM CPU Models for Live Migration

Harvester v1.8.0 addresses an issue where live migrating VMs between hosts with different CPU generations (for example, AMD Ryzen 5th Gen to 3rd Gen) would fail due to strict CPU feature-matching checks by KubeVirt/libvirt. Users can now explicitly define a specific CPU model (for example, IvyBridge, host-model, or default) for a VM during creation via the Harvester UI or Terraform provider. This ensures the VM is only scheduled and migrated across nodes that support the selected baseline CPU model, enabling reliable backward compatibility and successful live migrations in mixed-hardware clusters.

> [Demo](https://youtu.be/TVQSRsJ6K4M) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/vm/live-migration) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/3015)

Reviewer: We should change the Documentation link to the new page https://github.com/harvester/docs/pull/1029 introduced.

### Interactive VPC Network Topology

In Harvester v1.8.0, a dynamic visual topology diagram is added to the VPC detail page, providing a clear representation of logical switches and network relationships. The interactive map displays the complete hierarchy from VPCs and Subnets to Overlay Networks and individual VMs while accurately reflecting VM power states by graying out stopped or paused instances. Users can easily navigate complex network architectures using pan and zoom controls, legend toggles for filtering node types, click-to-highlight node relationships, and clickable VPC peering links that seamlessly redirect to associated topology pages.

> [Demo](https://youtu.be/b9QHwFFkSao) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/networking/kubeovn-vpcnatgateway) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/9748)

Reviewer: Documentation: wait for @houhoucoop's doc PR.

Reviewer: https://github.com/harvester/docs/pull/1031

### Fine-Grained Harvester RBAC Roles for Rancher

Harvester v1.8.0 introduces Harvester-specific Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) roles within Rancher, fully enforced at the backend API-level. This allows administrators to assign highly specific, granular permissions based on user needs. New capabilities include read-only roles for viewing VM definitions and monitoring data, specialized roles for non-admins to manage hardware devices (PCI, USB, vGPU), and scoped "VM Admin" roles restricted to editing VMs within specific namespaces without granting access to underlying infrastructure like images or networks. Role permissions are additive, and for security purposes, sensitive cluster-level configurations, such as logging facilities remain strictly editable only by cluster admins, with non-admins restricted to read-only access.

[Demo](https://youtu.be/cm7fCswrrz8) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/rancher/rancher-rbac) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7909)

> ### Layer 3 Underlay for software-defined Cluster Networks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Layer 3 Underlay for Software-Defined Cluster Networks
```

### SUSE Observability Integration

Harvester v1.8.0 officially supports integration with the SUSE Observability Stack Pack. Harvester clusters can now seamlessly register with SUSE Observability to track core metrics, ensuring reliable data continuity and accurate resource reporting (such as CPU, memory and node size) across cluster upgrades and dynamic scaling operations.

[Demo](https://youtu.be/8UeAceSBy-Q) | [Documentation](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/advanced/addons/suse-observability-agent) | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/8282)

### Stand-alone Upgrade Manager - Experimental

Harvester v1.8.0 decouples the upgrade logic from the core harvester binary into a stand-alone upgrade-manager. This architectural change enables faster delivery and testing of upgrade-related features and bug fixes without waiting for full release cycles. The upgrade lifecycle is now efficiently managed by `components—upgrade-shim` (early stage preparation), `upgrade-repo` (metadata and image hub), and `upgrade-manager` (custom lifecycle controllers) improving the overall maintainability and upgrade reliability.

> [Demo](https://youtu.be/pxqGzArkxNc) | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/7112)

Reviewer: Documentation: wait for https://github.com/harvester/docs/pull/1012

### Enhanced Device Identification and Native Support for Non-WWN Disks

> Harvester v1.8.0 introduces a reworked BlockDevice naming convention that removes the strict requirement for World Wide Names (WWNs). This allows disks without WWNs to be recognized and provisioned seamlessly across Longhorn V1, Longhorn V2, and LVM storage backends. This enhancement significantly streamlines disk attachment, particularly for NVMe devices and other hardware where WWNs may not be available.

Reviewer 4: LGTM, thanks. I spent a little while thinking about going into more detail, like, the WWN thing is only a problem for NVMe devices behind certain RAID controllers, that thus appear as `/dev/sd*`, it shouldn't be a problem for NVMe devices that appear as `/dev/nvme*`... But honestly that's probably too complicated/confusing :-)

Reviewer: Thanks for the detail! Yes, I think we can leave those details into the GH issue or a separate page if needed 🙂

> [Demo](https://youtu.be/KK1VynmMVJo) | [Documentation]() | [GitHub issue](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/6261)

Reviewer: Documentation: wait for @tserong's doc PR.

Reviewer: https://github.com/harvester/docs/pull/1032
